.TH L3M-DOWNLOAD 1 "January 2026" "l3m-backend" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
l3m-download \- download GGUF models from Hugging Face
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B l3m-download
\fB--preset\fR \fIPRESET\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.br
.B l3m-download
\fB--repo\fR \fIREPO\fR \fB--file\fR \fIFILE\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B l3m-download
downloads GGUF model files from Hugging Face repositories for use with
l3m-chat. Models can be downloaded using predefined presets or by
specifying a repository and filename directly.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-preset " PRESET"
Download a model using a predefined preset. Use \fB--list-presets\fR
to see available presets.
.TP
.B \-\-list-presets
List all available model presets and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-repo " REPO"
Hugging Face repository in the format "organization/model-name".
.TP
.BI \-\-file " FILE"
Specific GGUF file to download from the repository.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " DIR" "\fR, " \-o " DIR"
Output directory for downloaded models. Default: ~/.l3m/models/
.SH PRESETS
Available presets include various quantized versions of popular models:
.TP
.B llama3.2-1b
Llama 3.2 1B Instruct (Q4_K_M quantization)
.TP
.B llama3.2-3b
Llama 3.2 3B Instruct (Q4_K_M quantization)
.TP
.B qwen2.5-1.5b
Qwen 2.5 1.5B Instruct (Q4_K_M quantization)
.PP
Use \fB--list-presets\fR for a complete list.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.l3m/models/
Default directory for downloaded model files.
.SH EXAMPLES
Download using a preset:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-download --preset llama3.2-1b
.fi
.RE
.PP
List available presets:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-download --list-presets
.fi
.RE
.PP
Download to a custom directory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-download --preset llama3.2-1b --output /path/to/models
.fi
.RE
.PP
Download from a specific repo:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-download --repo bartowski/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct-GGUF \\
    --file Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct-Q4_K_M.gguf
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR l3m-chat (1),
.BR l3m-tools (1),
.BR l3m-completion (1)
.SH AUTHORS
l3m-backend contributors.
