.TH L3M-TOOLS 1 "January 2026" "l3m-backend" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
l3m-tools \- manage and inspect LLM tools in the l3m registry
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B l3m-tools
\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIARGS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B l3m-tools
provides commands for listing, inspecting, and creating tools in the
l3m-backend tool registry. Tools are functions that can be called by
the LLM during chat sessions.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS list
List all registered tools.
.PP
.RS
.B l3m-tools list
[\fB-v\fR|\fB--verbose\fR]
.RE
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show full descriptions instead of summaries.
.SS schema
Show OpenAI-compatible tool schema in JSON format.
.PP
.RS
.B l3m-tools schema
[\fITOOL_NAME\fR]
.RE
.PP
Without arguments, shows schema for all tools. With a tool name,
shows schema for that specific tool.
.SS info
Show detailed information about a specific tool.
.PP
.RS
.B l3m-tools info
\fITOOL_NAME\fR
.RE
.PP
Displays the tool's name, aliases, description, and parameter schema.
.SS create
Create a new user tool from a template.
.PP
.RS
.B l3m-tools create
\fITOOL_NAME\fR [\fB--wrapper\fR] [\fB--force\fR]
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-wrapper
Generate a wrapper tool template for external commands instead of
the basic tool template.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-force
Overwrite existing tool directory if it exists.
.PP
Creates a new tool in ~/.l3m/tools/\fITOOL_NAME\fR/ with an
__init__.py containing the tool implementation scaffold.
.SH TOOL TYPES
.SS Built-in Tools
Tools provided by the l3m-backend package, including:
.IP \(bu 2
.B get_weather
\- Get weather information for a city
.IP \(bu 2
.B get_time
\- Get current date and time
.IP \(bu 2
.B calculate
\- Evaluate mathematical expressions
.IP \(bu 2
.B wikipedia
\- Search Wikipedia articles
.IP \(bu 2
.B run_python
\- Execute Python code (development tools)
.SS User Tools
Custom tools created in ~/.l3m/tools/. Each tool is a directory
containing an __init__.py that registers functions with the tool
registry using the @registry.register decorator.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.l3m/tools/
Directory for user-defined tools. Each subdirectory should contain
an __init__.py with tool definitions.
.SH EXAMPLES
List all tools:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools list
.fi
.RE
.PP
List tools with full descriptions:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools list -v
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show schema for all tools:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools schema
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show info for a specific tool:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools info get_weather
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a new tool:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools create my_tool
.fi
.RE
.PP
Create a wrapper tool:
.PP
.RS
.nf
l3m-tools create git_status --wrapper
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR l3m-chat (1),
.BR l3m-download (1),
.BR l3m-completion (1)
.SH AUTHORS
l3m-backend contributors.
